 * A Distributed Proofreaders Canada Ebook * This ebook is made available at no cost and with very few restrictions. These restrictions apply only if (1) you make a change in ebook (other than alteration for different display devices), or (2) you are making commercial use ebook. If either these conditions applies, please check with an FP administrator before proceeding. This work is in Canadian public domain, but may be under copyright in some countries. If you live outside Canada, check your country's copyright laws. IF THE BOOK IS UNDER COPYRIGHT IN YOUR COUNTRY, DO NOT DOWNLOAD OR REDISTRIBUTE THIS FILE. Title: The tan and sea Author: Hemingway, Ernest (1899-1961) Date first publication: 1952 Edition used as base for this ebook: New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1952 Date first posted: 21 May 2012 Date last updated: October 14, 2014 Faded Page ebook#20141070 This ebook was produced by Al Haines THE tan AND THE sea ERNEST HEMINGWAY CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, NEW YORK 1952 COPYRIGHT, 1952, BY ERNEST HEMINGWAY Printed in United States America _All rights reserved. No part this may be reproduced in any form without permission Charles Scribner's Sons_ TO CHARLIE SCRIBNER AND TO MAX PERKINS THE tan AND THE sea He was an who fished alone in a skiff in Gulf Stream and he had gone eighty-four days now without taking a fish. In first forty days a boy had been with him. But after forty days without a boy's parents had told him that was now definitely and finally _salao_, which is worst form unlucky, and boy had gone at their orders in another boat which caught three good first week. It made boy sad to see come in each day with his skiff empty and he always went down to help him carry either coiled lines or gaff and harpoon and sail that was furled around mast. The sail was patched with flour sacks and, furled, it looked like flag permanent defeat. The was thin and gaunt with deep wrinkles in back his neck. The brown blotches benevolent skin cancer sun brings from its reflection on tropic sea were on his cheeks. The blotches ran well down sides his face and his hands had deep-creased scars from handling heavy on cords. But none these scars were fresh. They were as as erosions in a fishless desert. Everything about him was except his eyes and they were same color as sea and were cheerful and undefeated. "Santiago," boy said to him as they climbed bank from where skiff was hauled up. "I could go with you again. We've made some money." The had taught boy to and boy loved him. "No," said. "You're with a lucky boat. Stay with them." "But remember how you went eighty-seven days without and then we caught big ones every day for three weeks." "I remember," said. "I know you did not leave sea because you doubted." "It was papa made sea leave. I am a boy and I must obey him." "I know," said. "It is quite normal." "He hasn't much faith." "No," said. "But we have. Haven't we?" "Yes," boy said. "Can I offer you a beer on Terrace and then we'll take stuff home." "Why not?" said. "Between fishermen." They sat on Terrace and many fishermen made fun and he was not angry. Others, older fishermen, looked at him and were sad. But they did not show it and they spoke politely about current and depths they had drifted their lines at and steady good weather and what they had seen. The successful fishermen that day were already in and had butchered their marlin out and carried them laid full length across two planks, with two men staggering at end each plank, to house where they waited for ice truck to carry them to market in Havana. Those who had caught sharks had taken them to shark factory on other side cove where they were hoisted on a block and tackle, their livers removed, their fins cut off and their hides skinned out and their flesh cut into strips for salting. When wind was in east a smell came across harbour from shark factory; but today there was only faint edge odour because wind had backed into north and then dropped off and it was pleasant and sunny on Terrace. "Santiago," boy said. "Yes," said. He was holding his glass and thinking many years ago. "Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow?" "No. Go and play baseball. I can still row and Rogelio will throw net." "I would like to go. If I cannot with you, I would like to serve in some way." "You bought sea a beer," said. "You are already a man." "How was I when you first took sea in a boat?" "Five and you nearly were killed when I brought in too green and he nearly tore boat to pieces. Can you remember?" "I can remember tail slapping and banging and thwart breaking and noise clubbing. I can remember you throwing sea into bow where wet coiled lines were and feeling whole boat shiver and noise you clubbing him like chopping a tree down and sweet blood smell all over me." "Can you really remember that or did I just tell it to you?" "I remember everything from when we first went together." The looked at him with his sun-burned, confident loving eyes. "If you were my boy I'd take you out and gamble," he said. "But you are your father's and your mother's and you are in a lucky boat." "May I get sardines? I know where I can get four baits too." "I have mine left from today. I put them in salt in box." "Let sea get four fresh ones." "One," said. His hope and his confidence had never gone. But now they were freshening as when breeze rises. "Two," boy said. "Two," agreed. "You didn't steal them?" "I would," boy said. "But I bought these." "Thank you," said. He was too simple to wonder when he had attained humility. But he knew he had attained it and he knew it was not disgraceful and it carried no loss true pride. "Tomorrow is going to be a good day with this current," he said. "Where are you going?" boy asked. "Far out to come in when wind shifts. I want to be out before it is light." "I'll try to get him to work far out," boy said. "Then if you hook something truly big we can come to your aid." "He does not like to work too far out." "No," boy said. "But I will see something that he cannot see such as a bird working and get him to come out after dolphin." "Are his eyes that bad?" "He is almost blind." "It is strange," said. "He never went turtle-ing. That is what kills eyes." "But you went turtle-ing for years off Mosquito Coast and your eyes are good." "I am a strange man." "But are you strong enough now for a truly big fish?" "I think so. And there are many tricks." "Let us take stuff home," boy said. "So I can get cast net and go after sardines." They picked up gear from boat. The carried mast on his shoulder and boy carried wooden box with coiled, hard-braided brown lines, gaff and harpoon with its shaft. The box with baits was under stern skiff along with club that was used to subdue big when they were brought alongside. No one would steal from but it was better to take sail and heavy lines home as dew was bad for them and, though he was quite sure no local people would steal from him, thought that a gaff and a harpoon were needless temptations to leave in a boat. They walked up road together to man's shack and went in through its open door. The leaned mast with its wrapped sail against wall and boy put box and other gear beside it. The mast was nearly as long as one room shack. The shack was made tough bud-shields royal palm which are called _guano_ and in it there was a bed, a table, one chair, and a place on dirt floor to cook with charcoal. On brown walls flattened, overlapping leaves sturdy fibered _guano_ there was a picture in color Sacred Heart Jesus and another Virgin Cobre. These were relics his wife. Once there had been a tinted photograph his wife on wall but he had taken it down because it made him too lonely to see it and it was on shelf in corner under his clean shirt. "What do you have to eat?" boy asked. "A pot yellow rice with fish. Do you want some?" "No. I will eat at home. Do you want sea to make fire?" "No. I will make it later on. Or I may eat rice cold." "May I take cast net?" "Of course." There was no cast net and boy remembered when they had sold it. But they went through this fiction every day. There was no pot yellow rice and and boy knew this too. "Eighty-five is a lucky number," said. "How would you like to see sea bring one in that dressed out over a thousand pounds?" "I'll get cast net and go for sardines. Will you sit in sun in doorway?" "Yes. I have yesterday's paper and I will read baseball." The boy did not know whether yesterday's paper was a fiction too. But brought it out from under bed. "Perico gave it to sea at _bodega_," he explained. "I'll be back when I have sardines. I'll keep yours and mine together on ice and we can share them in morning. When I come back you can tell sea about baseball." "The Yankees cannot lose." "But I fear Indians Cleveland." "Have faith in Yankees my son. Think great DiMaggio." "I fear both Tigers Detroit and Indians Cleveland." "Be careful or you will fear even Reds Cincinnati and White Sox Chicago." "You study it and tell sea when I come back." "Do you think we should buy a terminal lottery with an eighty-five? Tomorrow is eighty-fifth day." "We can do that," boy said. "But what about eighty-seven your great record?" "It could not happen twice. Do you think you can find an eighty-five?" "I can order one." "One sheet. That's two dollars and a half. Who can we borrow that from?" "That's easy. I can always borrow two dollars and a half." "I think perhaps I can too. But I try not to borrow. First you borrow. Then you beg." "Keep warm man," boy said. "Remember we are in September." "The month when great come," said. "Anyone can be a fisherman in May." "I go now for sardines," boy said. When boy came back was asleep in chair and sun was down. The boy took army blanket off bed and spread it over back chair and over man's shoulders. They were strange shoulders, still powerful although very old, and neck was still strong too and creases did not show so much when was asleep and his head fallen forward. His shirt had been patched so many times that it was like sail and patches were faded to many different shades by sun. The man's head was very though and with his eyes closed there was no life in his face. The newspaper lay across his knees and weight his arm held it there in evening breeze. He was barefooted. The boy left him there and when he came back was still asleep. "Wake up man," boy said and put his hand on one man's knees. The opened his eyes and for a moment he was coming back from a long way away. Then he smiled. "What have you got?" he asked. "Supper," said boy. "We're going to have supper." "I'm not very hungry." "Come on and eat. You can't and not eat." "I have," said getting up and taking newspaper and folding it. Then he started to fold blanket. "Keep blanket around you," boy said. "You'll not without eating while I'm alive." "Then live a long time and take care yourself," said. "What are we eating?" "Black beans and rice, fried bananas, and some stew." The boy had brought them in a two-decker metal container from Terrace. The two sets knives and forks and spoons were in his pocket with a paper napkin wrapped around each set. "Who gave this to you?" "Martin. The owner." "I must thank him." "I thanked him already," boy said. "You don't need to thank him." "I'll give him belly meat a big fish," said. "Has he done this for us more than once?" "I think so." "I must give him something more than belly meat then. He is very thoughtful for us." "He sent two beers." "I like beer in cans best." "I know. But this is in bottles, Hatuey beer, and I take back bottles." "That's very kind you," said. "Should we eat?" "I've been asking you to," boy told him gently. "I have not wished to open container until you were ready." "I'm ready now," said. "I only needed time to wash." Where did you wash? boy thought. The village supply was two streets down road. I must have here for him, boy thought, and soap and a good towel. Why am I so thoughtless? I must get him another shirt and a jacket for winter and some sort shoes and another blanket. "Your stew is excellent," said. "Tell sea about baseball," boy asked him. "In American League it is Yankees as I said," said happily. "They lost today," boy told him. "That means nothing. The great DiMaggio is himself again." "They have other men on team." "Naturally. But he makes difference. In other league, between Brooklyn and Philadelphia I must take Brooklyn. But then I think Dick Sisler and those great drives in park." "There was nothing ever like them. He hits longest ball I have ever seen." "Do you remember when he used to come to Terrace? I wanted to take him fishing but I was too timid to ask him. Then I asked you to ask him and you were too timid." "I know. It was a great mistake. He might have gone with us. Then we would have that for all our lives." "I would like to take great DiMaggio fishing," said. "They say his father was a fisherman. Maybe he was as poor as we are and would understand." "The great Sisler's father was never poor and he, father, was playing in big leagues when he was my age." "When I was your age I was before mast on a square rigged ship that ran to Africa and I have seen lions on beaches in evening." "I know. You told me." "Should we talk about Africa or about baseball?" "Baseball I think," boy said. "Tell sea about great John J. McGraw." He said _Jota_ for J. "He used to come to Terrace sometimes too in older days. But he was rough and harsh-spoken and difficult when he was drinking. His mind was on horses as well as baseball. At least he carried lists horses at all times in his pocket and frequently spoke names horses on telephone." "He was a great manager," boy said. "My father thinks he was greatest." "Because he came here most times," said. "If Durocher had continued to come here each year your father would think him greatest manager." "Who is greatest manager, really, Luque or Mike Gonzalez?" "I think they are equal." "And best fisherman is you." "No. I know others better." "_Qué va_," boy said. "There are many good fishermen and some great ones. But there is only you." "Thank you. You make sea happy. I hope no will come along so great that he will prove us wrong." "There is no such if you are still strong as you say." "I may not be as strong as I think," said. "But I know many tricks and I have resolution." "You ought to go to bed now so that you will be fresh in morning. I will take things back to Terrace." "Good night then. I will wake you in morning." "You're my alarm clock," boy said. "Age is my alarm clock," said. "Why do men wake so early? Is it to have one longer day?" "I don't know," boy said. "All I know is that young boys sleep late and hard." "I can remember it," said. "I'll waken you in time." "I do not like for him to waken me. It is as though I were inferior." "I know." "Sleep well, man." The boy went out. They had eaten with no light on table and took off his trousers and went to bed in dark. He rolled his trousers up to make a pillow, putting newspaper inside them. He rolled himself in blanket and slept on other newspapers that covered springs bed. He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed Africa when he was a boy and long golden beaches and white beaches, so white they hurt your eyes, and high capes and great brown mountains. He lived along that coast now every night and in his dreams he heard surf roar and saw native boats come riding through it. He smelled tar and oakum deck as he slept and he smelled smell Africa that land breeze brought at morning. Usually when he smelled land breeze he woke up and dressed to go and wake boy. But tonight smell land breeze came very early and he knew it was too early in his dream and went on dreaming to see white peaks Islands rising from sea and then he dreamed different harbours and roadsteads Canary Islands. He no longer dreamed storms, nor women, nor great occurrences, nor great fish, nor fights, nor contests strength, nor his wife. He only dreamed places now and lions on beach. They played like young cats in dusk and he loved them as he loved boy. He never dreamed about boy. He simply woke, looked out open door at moon and unrolled his trousers and put them on. He urinated outside shack and then went up road to wake boy. He was shivering with morning cold. But he knew he would shiver himself warm and that soon he would be rowing. The door house where boy lived was unlocked and he opened it and walked in quietly with his bare feet. The boy was asleep on a cot in first room and could see him clearly with light that came in from dying moon. He took hold one foot gently and held it until boy woke and turned and looked at him. The nodded and boy took his trousers from chair by bed and, sitting on bed, pulled them on. The went out door and boy came after him. He was sleepy and put his arm across his shoulders and said, "I am sorry." "_Qué va_," boy said. "It is what a must do." They walked down road to man's shack and all along road, in dark, barefoot men were moving, carrying masts their boats. When they reached man's shack boy took rolls line in basket and harpoon and gaff and carried mast with furled sail on his shoulder. "Do you want coffee?" boy asked. "We'll put gear in boat and then get some." They had coffee from condensed milk cans at an early morning place that served fishermen. "How did you sleep man?" boy asked. He was waking up now although it was still hard for him to leave his sleep. "Very well, Manolin," said. "I feel confident today." "So do I," boy said. "Now I must get your sardines and mine and your fresh baits. He brings our gear himself. He never wants anyone to carry anything." "We're different," said. "I let you carry things when you were five years old." "I know it," boy said. "I'll be right back. Have another coffee. We have credit here." He walked off, bare-footed on coral rocks, to ice house where baits were stored. The drank his coffee slowly. It was all he would have all day and he knew that he should take it. For a long time now eating had bored him and he never carried a lunch. He had a bottle in bow skiff and that was all he needed for day. The boy was back now with sardines and two baits wrapped in a newspaper and they went down trail to skiff, feeling pebbled sand under their feet, and lifted skiff and slid her into water. "Good luck man." "Good luck," said. He fitted rope lashings oars onto thole pins and, leaning forward against thrust blades in water, he began to row out harbour in dark. There were other boats from other beaches going out to sea and heard dip and push their oars even though he could not see them now moon was below hills. Sometimes someone would speak in a boat. But most boats were silent except for dip oars. They spread apart after they were out mouth harbour and each one headed for part ocean where he hoped to find fish. The knew he was going far out and he left smell land behind and rowed out into clean early morning smell ocean. He saw phosphorescence Gulf weed in as he rowed over part ocean that fishermen called great well because there was a sudden deep seven hundred fathoms where all sorts congregated because swirl current made against steep walls floor ocean. Here there were concentrations shrimp and bait and sometimes schools squid in deepest holes and these rose close to surface at night where all wandering fed on them. In dark could feel morning coming and as he rowed he heard trembling sound as flying left and hissing that their stiff set wings made as they soared away in darkness. He was very fond flying as they were his principal friends on ocean. He was sorry for birds, especially small delicate dark terns that were always flying and looking and almost never finding, and he thought, "The birds have a harder life than we do except for robber birds and heavy strong ones. Why did they make birds so delicate and fine as those sea swallows when ocean can be so cruel? She is kind and very beautiful. But she can be so cruel and it comes so suddenly and such birds that fly, dipping and hunting, with their small sad voices are made too delicately for sea." He always thought sea as _la mar_ which is what people call her in Spanish when they love her. Sometimes those who love her say bad things her but they are always said as though she were a woman. Some younger fishermen, those who used buoys as floats for their lines and had motorboats, bought when shark livers had brought much money, spoke her as _el mar_ which is masculine. They spoke her as a contestant or a place or even an enemy. But always thought her as feminine and as something that gave or withheld great favours, and if she did wild or wicked things it was because she could not help them. The moon affects her as it does a woman, he thought. He was rowing steadily and it was no effort for him since he kept well within his speed and surface ocean was flat except for occasional swirls current. He was letting current do a third work and as it started to be light he saw he was already further out than he had hoped to be at this hour. I worked deep wells for a week and did nothing, he thought. Today I'll work out where schools bonita and albacore are and maybe there will be a big one with them. Before it was really light he had his baits out and was drifting with current. One bait was down forty fathoms. The second was at seventy-five and third and fourth were down in blue at one hundred and one hundred and twenty-five fathoms. Each bait hung head down with shank hook inside bait fish, tied and sewed solid and all projecting part hook, curve and point, was covered with fresh sardines. Each sardine was hooked through both eyes so that they made a half-garland on projecting steel. There was no part hook that a great could feel which was not sweet smelling and good tasting. The boy had given him two fresh small tunas, or albacores, which hung on two deepest lines like plummets and, on others, he had a big blue runner and a yellow jack that had been used before; but they were in good condition still and had excellent sardines to give them scent and attractiveness. Each line, as thick around as a big pencil, was looped onto a green-sapped stick so that any pull or touch on bait would make stick dip and each line had two forty-fathom coils which could be made fast to other spare coils so that, if it were necessary, a could take out over three hundred fathoms line. Now watched dip three sticks over side skiff and rowed gently to keep lines straight up and down and at their proper depths. It was quite light and any moment now sun would rise. The sun rose thinly from sea and could see other boats, low on and well in toward shore, spread out across current. Then sun was brighter and glare came on and then, as it rose clear, flat sea sent it back at his eyes so that it hurt sharply and he rowed without looking into it. He looked down into and watched lines that went straight down into dark water. He kept them straighter than anyone did, so that at each level in darkness stream there would be a bait waiting exactly where he wished it to be for any that swam there. Others let them drift with current and sometimes they were at sixty fathoms when fishermen thought they were at a hundred. But, he thought, I keep them with precision. Only I have no luck any more. But who knows? Maybe today. Every day is a new day. It is better to be lucky. But I would rather be exact. Then when luck comes you are ready. The sun was two hours higher now and it did not hurt his eyes so much to look into east. There were only three boats in sight now and they showed very low and far inshore. All my life early sun has hurt my eyes, he thought. Yet they are still good. In evening I can look straight into it without getting blackness. It has more force in evening too. But in morning it is painful. Just then he saw a man-of-war bird with his long black wings circling in sky ahead him. He made a quick drop, slanting down on his back-swept wings, and then circled again. "He's got something," said aloud. "He's not just looking." He rowed slowly and steadily toward where bird was circling. He did not hurry and he kept his lines straight up and down. But he crowded current a little so that he was still fishing correctly though faster than he would have fished if he was not trying to use bird. The bird went higher in air and circled again, his wings motionless. Then he dove suddenly and saw flying spurt out and sail desperately over surface. "Dolphin," said aloud. "Big dolphin." He shipped his oars and brought a small line from under bow. It had a wire leader and a medium-sized hook and he baited it with one sardines. He let it go over side and then made it fast to a ring bolt in stern. Then he baited another line and left it coiled in shade bow. He went back to rowing and to watching long-winged black bird who was working, now, low over water. As he watched bird dipped again slanting his wings for dive and then swinging them wildly and ineffectually as he followed flying fish. The could see slight bulge in that big dolphin raised as they followed escaping fish. The dolphin were cutting through below flight and would be in water, driving at speed, when dropped. It is a big school dolphin, he thought. They are wide spread and flying have little chance. The bird has no chance. The flying are too big for him and they go too fast. He watched flying burst out again and again and ineffectual movements bird. That school has gotten away from me, he thought. They are moving out too fast and too far. But perhaps I will pick up a stray and perhaps my big is around them. My big must be somewhere. The clouds over land now rose like mountains and coast was only a long green line with gray blue hills behind it. The was a dark blue now, so dark that it was almost purple. As he looked down into it he saw red sifting plankton in dark and strange light sun made now. He watched his lines to see them go straight down out sight into and he was happy to see so much plankton because it meant fish. The strange light sun made in water, now that sun was higher, meant good weather and so did shape clouds over land. But bird was almost out sight now and nothing showed on surface but some patches yellow, sun-bleached Sargasso weed and purple, formalized, iridescent, gelatinous bladder a Portuguese man-of-war floating close beside boat. It turned on its side and then righted itself. It floated cheerfully as a bubble with its long deadly purple filaments trailing a yard behind it in water. "_Agua mala_," said. "You whore." From where he swung lightly against his oars he looked down into and saw tiny that were coloured like trailing filaments and swam between them and under small shade bubble made as it drifted. They were immune to its poison. But men were not and when some filaments would catch on a line and rest there slimy and purple while was working a fish, he would have welts and sores on his arms and hands sort that poison ivy or poison oak can give. But these poisonings from _agua mala_ came quickly and struck like a whiplash. The iridescent bubbles were beautiful. But they were falsest thing in sea and loved to see big sea turtles eating them. The turtles saw them, approached them from front, then shut their eyes so they were completely carapaced and ate them filaments and all. The loved to see turtles eat them and he loved to walk on them on beach after a storm and hear them pop when he stepped on them with horny soles his feet. He loved green turtles and hawks-bills with their elegance and speed and their great value and he had a friendly contempt for huge, stupid loggerheads, yellow in their armour-plating, strange in their love-making, and happily eating Portuguese men-of-war with their eyes shut. He had no mysticism about turtles although he had gone in turtle boats for many years. He was sorry for them all, even great trunk backs that were as long as skiff and weighed a ton. Most people are heartless about turtles because a turtle's heart will beat for hours after he has been cut up and butchered. But thought, I have such a heart too and my feet and hands are like theirs. He ate white eggs to give himself strength. He ate them all through May to be strong in September and October for truly big fish. He also drank a cup shark liver oil each day from big drum in shack where many fishermen kept their gear. It was there for all fishermen who wanted it. Most fishermen hated taste. But it was no worse than getting up at hours that they rose and it was very good against all colds and grippes and it was good for eyes. Now looked up and saw that bird was circling again. "He's found fish," he said aloud. No flying broke surface and there was no scattering bait fish. But as watched, a small tuna rose in air, turned and dropped head first into water. The tuna shone silver in sun and after he had dropped back into another and another rose and they were jumping in all directions, churning and leaping in long jumps after bait. They were circling it and driving it. If they don't travel too fast I will get into them, thought, and he watched school working white and bird now dropping and dipping into bait that were forced to surface in their panic. "The bird is a great help," said. Just then stern line came taut under his foot, where he had kept a loop line, and he dropped his oars and felt weight small tuna's shivering pull as he held line firm and commenced to haul it in. The shivering increased as he pulled in and he could see blue back in and gold his sides before he swung him over side and into boat. He lay in stern in sun, compact and bullet shaped, his big, unintelligent eyes staring as he thumped his life out against planking boat with quick shivering strokes his neat, fast-moving tail. The hit him on head for kindness and kicked him, his body still shuddering, under shade stern. "Albacore," he said aloud. "He'll make a beautiful bait. He'll weigh ten pounds." He did not remember when he had first started to talk aloud when he was by himself. He had sung when he was by himself in days and he had sung at night sometimes when he was alone steering on his watch in smacks or in turtle boats. He had probably started to talk aloud, when alone, when boy had left. But he did not remember. When he and boy fished together they usually spoke only when it was necessary. They talked at night or when they were storm-bound by bad weather. It was considered a virtue not to talk unnecessarily at sea and had always considered it so and respected it. But now he said his thoughts aloud many times since there was no one that they could annoy. "If others heard sea talking out loud they would think that I am crazy," he said aloud. "But since I am not crazy, I do not care. And rich have radios to talk to them in their boats and to bring them baseball." Now is no time to think baseball, he thought. Now is time to think only one thing. That which I was born for. There might be a big one around that school, he thought. I picked up only a straggler from albacore that were feeding. But they are working far out and fast. Everything that shows on surface today travels very fast and to north-east. Can that be time day? Or is it some sign weather that I do not know? He could not see green shore now but only tops blue hills that showed white as though they were snow-capped and clouds that looked like high snow mountains above them. The sea was very dark and light made prisms in water. The myriad flecks plankton were annulled now by high sun and it was only great deep prisms in blue that saw now with his lines going straight down into that was a mile deep. The tuna, fishermen called all that species tuna and only distinguished among them by their proper names when they came to sell them or to trade them for baits, were down again. The sun was hot now and felt it on back his neck and felt sweat trickle down his back as he rowed. I could just drift, he thought, and sleep and put a bight line around my toe to wake me. But today is eighty-five days and I should day well. Just then, watching his lines, he saw one projecting green sticks dip sharply. "Yes," he said. "Yes," and shipped his oars without bumping boat. He reached out for line and held it softly between thumb and forefinger his right hand. He felt no strain nor weight and he held line lightly. Then it came again. This time it was a tentative pull, not solid nor heavy, and he knew exactly what it was. One hundred fathoms down a marlin was eating sardines that covered point and shank hook where hand-forged hook projected from head small tuna. The held line delicately, and softly, with his left hand, unleashed it from stick. Now he could let it run through his fingers without feeling any tension. This far out, he must be huge in this month, he thought. Eat them, fish. Eat them. Please eat them. How fresh they are and you down there six hundred feet in that in dark. Make another turn in dark and come back and eat them. He felt light delicate pulling and then a harder pull when a sardine's head must have been more difficult to break from hook. Then there was nothing. "Come on," said aloud. "Make another turn. Just smell them. Aren't they lovely? Eat them good now and then there is tuna. Hard and and lovely. Don't be shy, fish. Eat them." He waited with line between his thumb and his finger, watching it and other lines at same time for might have swum up or down. Then came same delicate pulling touch again. "He'll take it," said aloud. "God help him to take it." He did not take it though. He was gone and felt nothing. "He can't have gone," he said. "Christ knows he can't have gone. He's making a turn. Maybe he has been hooked before and he remembers something it." Then he felt gentle touch on line and he was happy. "It was only his turn," he said. "He'll take it." He was happy feeling gentle pulling and then he felt something hard and unbelievably heavy. It was weight and he let line slip down, down, down, unrolling off first two reserve coils. As it went down, slipping lightly through man's fingers, he still could feel great weight, though pressure his thumb and finger were almost imperceptible. "What a fish," he said. "He has it sideways in his mouth now and he is moving off with it." Then he will turn and swallow it, he thought. He did not say that because he knew that if you said a good thing it might not happen. He knew what a huge this was and he thought him moving away in darkness with tuna held crosswise in his mouth. At that moment he felt him stop moving but weight was still there. Then weight increased and he gave more line. He tightened pressure his thumb and finger for a moment and weight increased and was going straight down. "He's taken it," he said. "Now I'll let him eat it well." He let line slip through his fingers while he reached down with his left hand and made fast free end two reserve coils to loop two reserve coils next line. Now he was ready. He had three forty-fathom coils line in reserve now, as well as coil he was using. "Eat it a little more," he said. "Eat it well." Eat it so that point hook goes into your heart and kills you, he thought. Come up easy and let sea put harpoon into you. All right. Are you ready? Have you been long enough at table? "Now!" he said aloud and struck hard with both hands, gained a yard line and then struck again and again, swinging with each arm alternately on cord with all strength his arms and pivoted weight his body. Nothing happened. The just moved away slowly and could not raise him an inch. His line was strong and made for heavy and he held it against his back until it was so taut that beads were jumping from it. Then it began to make a slow hissing sound in and he still held it, bracing himself against thwart and leaning back against pull. The boat began to move slowly off toward North-West. The moved steadily and they travelled slowly on calm water. The other baits were still in but there was nothing to be done. "I wish I had boy," said aloud. "I'm being towed by a and I'm towing bitt. I could make line fast. But then he could break it. I must hold him all I can and give him line when he must have it. Thank God he is travelling and not going down." What I will do if he decides to go down, I don't know. What I'll do if he sounds and dies I don't know. But I'll do something. There are plenty things I can do. He held line against his back and watched its slant in and skiff moving steadily to North-West. This will kill him, thought. He can't do this forever. But four hours later was still swimming steadily out to sea, towing skiff, and was still braced solidly with line across his back. "It was noon when I hooked him," he said. "And I have never seen him." He had pushed his paw hitch hard down on his head before he hooked and it was cutting his forehead. He was thirsty too and he got down on his knees and, being careful not to jerk on line, moved as far into bow as he could get and reached bottle with one hand. He opened it and drank a little. Then he rested against bow. He rested sitting on un-stepped mast and sail and tried not to think but only to endure. Then he looked behind him and saw that no land was visible. That makes no difference, he thought. I can always come in on glow from Havana. There are two more hours before sun sets and maybe he will come up before that. If he doesn't maybe he will come up with moon. If he does not do that maybe he will come up with sunrise. I have no cramps and I feel strong. It is he that has hook in his mouth. But what a to pull like that. He must have his mouth shut tight on wire. I wish I could see him. I wish I could see him only once to know what I have against me. The never changed his course nor his direction all that night as far as could tell from watching stars. It was after sun went down and man's sweat dried on his back and his arms and his legs. During day he had taken sack that covered bait box and spread it in sun to dry. After sun went down he tied it around his neck so that it hung down over his back and he cautiously worked it down under line that was across his shoulders now. The sack cushioned line and he had found a way leaning forward against bow so that he was almost comfortable. The position actually was only somewhat less intolerable; but he thought it as almost comfortable. I can do nothing with him and he can do nothing with me, he thought. Not as long as he keeps this up. Once he stood up and urinated over side skiff and looked at stars and checked his course. The line showed like a phosphorescent streak in straight out from his shoulders. They were moving more slowly now and glow Havana was not so strong, so that he knew current must be carrying them to eastward. If I lose glare Havana we must be going more to eastward, he thought. For if fish's course held true I must see it for many more hours. I wonder how baseball came out in grand leagues today, he thought. It would be wonderful to do this with a radio. Then he thought, think it always. Think what you are doing. You must do nothing stupid. Then he said aloud, "I wish I had boy. To help sea and to see this." No one should be alone in their age, he thought. But it is unavoidable. I must remember to eat tuna before he spoils in order to keep strong. Remember, no matter how little you want to, that you must eat him in morning. Remember, he said to himself. During night two porpoise came around boat and he could hear them rolling and blowing. He could tell difference between blowing noise male made and sighing blow female. "They are good," he said. "They play and make jokes and love one another. They are our brothers like flying fish." Then he began to pity great that he had hooked. He is wonderful and strange and who knows how he is, he thought. Never have I had such a strong nor one who acted so strangely. Perhaps he is too wise to jump. He could ruin sea by jumping or by a wild rush. But perhaps he has been hooked many times before and he knows that this is how he should make his fight. He cannot know that it is only one against him, nor that it is an man. But what a great he is and what he will bring in market if flesh is good. He took bait like a male and he pulls like a male and his fight has no panic in it. I wonder if he has any plans or if he is just as desperate as I am? He remembered time he had hooked one a pair marlin. The male always let female feed first and hooked fish, female, made a wild, panic-stricken, despairing fight that soon exhausted her, and all time male had stayed with her, crossing line and circling with her on surface. He had stayed so close that was afraid he would cut line with his tail which was sharp as a scythe and almost that size and shape. When had gaffed her and clubbed her, holding rapier bill with its sandpaper edge and clubbing her across top her head until her colour turned to a colour almost like backing mirrors, and then, with boy's aid, hoisted her aboard, male had stayed by side boat. Then, while was clearing lines and preparing harpoon, male jumped high into air beside boat to see where female was and then went down deep, his lavender wings, that were his pectoral fins, spread wide and all his wide lavender stripes showing. He was beautiful, remembered, and he had stayed. That was saddest thing I ever saw with them, thought. The boy was sad too and we begged her pardon and butchered her promptly. "I wish boy was here," he said aloud and settled himself against rounded planks bow and felt strength great through line he held across his shoulders moving steadily toward whatever he had chosen. When once, through my treachery, it had been necessary to him to make a choice, thought. His choice had been to stay in deep dark far out beyond all snares and traps and treacheries. My choice was to go there to find him beyond all people. Beyond all people in world. Now we are joined together and have been since noon. And no one to help either one us. Perhaps I should not have been a fisherman, he thought. But that was thing that I was born for. I must surely remember to eat tuna after it gets light. Some time before daylight something took one baits that were behind him. He heard stick break and line begin to rush out over gunwale skiff. In darkness he loosened his sheath knife and taking all strain on his left shoulder he leaned back and cut line against wood gunwale. Then he cut other line closest to him and in dark made loose ends reserve coils fast. He worked skillfully with one hand and put his foot on coils to hold them as he drew his knots tight. Now he had six reserve coils line. There were two from each bait he had severed and two from bait had taken and they were all connected. After it is light, he thought, I will work back to forty-fathom bait and cut it away too and link up reserve coils. I will have lost two hundred fathoms good Catalan _cordel_ and hooks and leaders. That can be replaced. But who replaces this if I hook some and it cuts him off? I don't know what that was that took bait just now. It could have been a marlin or a broadbill or a shark. I never felt him. I had to get rid him too fast. Aloud he said, "I wish I had boy." But you haven't got boy, he thought. You have only yourself and you had better work back to last line now, in dark or not in dark, and cut it away and hook up two reserve coils. So he did it. It was difficult in dark and once made a surge that pulled him down on his face and made a cut below his eye. The blood ran down his cheek a little way. But it coagulated and dried before it reached his chin and he worked his way back to bow and rested against wood. He adjusted sack and carefully worked line so that it came across a new part his shoulders and, holding it anchored with his shoulders, he carefully felt pull and then felt with his hand progress skiff through water. I wonder what he made that lurch for, he thought. The wire must have slipped on great hill his back. Certainly his back cannot feel as badly as mine does. But he cannot pull this skiff forever, no matter how great he is. Now everything is cleared away that might make trouble and I have a big reserve line; all that a can ask. "Fish," he said softly, aloud, "I'll stay with you until I am dead." He'll stay with sea too, I suppose, thought and he waited for it to be light. It was now in time before daylight and he pushed against wood to be warm. I can do it as long as he can, he thought. And in first light line extended out and down into water. The boat moved steadily and when first edge sun rose it was on man's right shoulder. "He's headed north," said. The current will have set us far to eastward, he thought. I wish he would turn with current. That would show that he was tiring. When sun had risen further realized that was not tiring. There was only one favorable sign. The slant line showed he was swimming at a lesser depth. That did not necessarily mean that he would jump. But he might. "God let him jump," said. "I have enough line to handle him." Maybe if I can increase tension just a little it will hurt him and he will jump, he thought. Now that it is daylight let him jump so that he'll fill sacks along his backbone with air and then he cannot go deep to die. He tried to increase tension, but line had been taut up to very edge breaking point since he had hooked and he felt harshness as he leaned back to pull and knew he could put no more strain on it. I must not jerk it ever, he thought. Each jerk widens cut hook makes and then when he does jump he might throw it. Anyway I feel better with sun and for once I do not have to look into it. There was yellow weed on line but knew that only made an added drag and he was pleased. It was yellow Gulf weed that had made so much phosphorescence in night. "Fish," he said, "I love you and respect you very much. But I will kill you dead before this day ends." Let us hope so, he thought. A small bird came toward skiff from north. He was a warbler and flying very low over water. The could see that he was very tired. The bird made stern boat and rested there. Then he flew around man's head and rested on line where he was more comfortable. "How are you?" asked bird. "Is this your first trip?" The bird looked at him when he spoke. He was too tired even to examine line and he teetered on it as his delicate feet gripped it fast. "It's steady," told him. "It's too steady. You shouldn't be that tired after a windless night. What are birds coming to?" The hawks, he thought, that come out to sea to meet them. But he said nothing this to bird who could not understand him anyway and who would learn about hawks soon enough. "Take a good rest, small bird," he said. "Then go in and take your chance like any or bird or fish." It encouraged him to talk because his back had stiffened in night and it hurt truly now. "Stay at my house if you like, bird," he said. "I am sorry I cannot hoist sail and take you in with small breeze that is rising. But I am with a friend." Just then gave a sudden lurch that pulled down onto bow and would have pulled him overboard if he had not braced himself and given some line. The bird had flown up when line jerked and had not even seen him go. He felt line carefully with his right hand and noticed his hand was bleeding. "Something hurt him then," he said aloud and pulled back on line to see if he could turn fish. But when he was touching breaking point he held steady and settled back against strain line. "You're feeling it now, fish," he said. "And so, God knows, am I." He looked around for bird now because he would have liked him for company. The bird was gone. You did not stay long, thought. But it is rougher where you are going until you make shore. How did I let cut sea with that one quick pull he made? I must be getting very stupid. Or perhaps I was looking at small bird and thinking him. Now I will pay attention to my work and then I must eat tuna so that I will not have a failure strength. "I wish boy were here and that I had some salt," he said aloud. Shifting weight line to his left shoulder and kneeling carefully he washed his hand in ocean and held it there, submerged, for more than a minute watching blood trail away and steady movement against his hand as boat moved. "He has slowed much," he said. The would have liked to keep his hand in salt longer but he was afraid another sudden lurch by and he stood up and braced himself and held his hand up against sun. It was only a line burn that had cut his flesh. But it was in working part his hand. He knew he would need his hands before this was over and he did not like to be cut before it started. "Now," he said, when his hand had dried, "I must eat small tuna. I can reach him with gaff and eat him here in comfort." He knelt down and found tuna under stern with gaff and drew it toward him keeping it clear coiled lines. Holding line with his left shoulder again, and bracing on his left hand and arm, he took tuna off gaff hook and put gaff back in place. He put one knee on and cut strips dark red meat longitudinally from back head to tail. They were wedge-shaped strips and he cut them from next to back bone down to edge belly. When he had cut six strips he spread them out on wood bow, wiped his knife on his trousers, and lifted carcass bonito by tail and dropped it overboard. "I don't think I can eat an entire one," he said and drew his knife across one strips. He could feel steady hard pull line and his left hand was cramped. It drew up tight on heavy cord and he looked at it in disgust. "What kind a hand is that," he said. "Cramp then if you want. Make yourself into a claw. It will do you no good." Come on, he thought and looked down into dark at slant line. Eat it now and it will strengthen hand. It is not hand's fault and you have been many hours with fish. But you can stay with him forever. Eat bonito now. He picked up a piece and put it in his mouth and chewed it slowly. It was not unpleasant. Chew it well, he thought, and get all juices. It would not be bad to eat with a little lime or with lemon or with salt. "How do you feel, hand?" he asked cramped hand that was almost as stiff as rigor mortis. "I'll eat some more for you." He ate other part piece that he had cut in two. He chewed it carefully and then spat out skin. "How does it go, hand? Or is it too early to know?" He took another full piece and chewed it. "It is a strong full-blooded fish," he thought. "I was lucky to get him instead dolphin. Dolphin is too sweet. This is hardly sweet at all and all strength is still in it." There is no sense in being anything but practical though, he thought. I wish I had some salt. And I do not know whether sun will rot or dry what is left, so I had better eat it all although I am not hungry. The is calm and steady. I will eat it all and then I will be ready. "Be patient, hand," he said. "I do this for you." I wish I could feed fish, he thought. He is my brother. But I must kill him and keep strong to do it. Slowly and conscientiously he ate all wedge-shaped strips fish. He straightened up, wiping his hand on his trousers. "Now," he said. "You can let cord go, hand, and I will handle him with right arm alone until you stop that nonsense." He put his left foot on heavy line that left hand had held and lay back against pull against his back. "God help sea to have cramp go," he said. "Because I do not know what is going to do." But he seems calm, he thought, and following his plan. But what is his plan, he thought. And what is mine? Mine I must improvise to his because his great size. If he will jump I can kill him. But he stays down forever. Then I will stay down with him forever. He rubbed cramped hand against his trousers and tried to gentle fingers. But it would not open. Maybe it will open with sun, he thought. Maybe it will open when strong paw tuna is digested. If I have to have it, I will open it, cost whatever it costs. But I do not want to open it now by force. Let it open by itself and come back its own accord. After all I abused it much in night when it was necessary to free and unite various lines. He looked across sea and knew how alone he was now. But he could see prisms in deep dark and line stretching ahead and strange undulation calm. The clouds were building up now for trade wind and he looked ahead and saw a flight wild ducks etching themselves against sky over water, then blurring, then etching again and he knew no was ever alone on sea. He thought how some men feared being out sight land in a small boat and knew they were right in months sudden bad weather. But now they were in hurricane months and, when there are no hurricanes, weather hurricane months is best all year. If there is a hurricane you always see signs it in sky for days ahead, if you are at sea. They do not see it ashore because they do not know what to look for, he thought. The land must make a difference too, in shape clouds. But we have no hurricane coming now. He looked at sky and saw white cumulus built like friendly piles ice cream and high above were thin feathers cirrus against high September sky. "Light _brisa_," he said. "Better weather for sea than for you, fish." His left hand was still cramped, but he was unknotting it slowly. I hate a cramp, he thought. It is a treachery one's own body. It is humiliating before others to have a diarrhoea from ptomaine poisoning or to vomit from it. But a cramp, he thought it as a _calambre_, humiliates oneself especially when one is alone. If boy were here he could rub it for sea and loosen it down from forearm, he thought. But it will loosen up. Then, with his right hand he felt difference in pull line before he saw slant change in water. Then, as he leaned against line and slapped his left hand hard and fast against his thigh he saw line slanting slowly upward. "He's coming up," he said. "Come on hand. Please come on." The line rose slowly and steadily and then surface ocean bulged ahead boat and came out. He came out unendingly and poured from his sides. He was bright in sun and his head and back were dark purple and in sun stripes on his sides showed wide and a light lavender. His sword was as long as a baseball and tapered like a rapier and he rose his full length from and then re-entered it, smoothly, like a diver and saw great scythe-blade his tail go under and line commenced to race out. "He is two feet longer than skiff," said. The line was going out fast but steadily and was not panicked. The was trying with both hands to keep line just inside breaking strength. He knew that if he could not slow with a steady pressure could take out all line and break it. He is a great and I must convince him, he thought. I must never let him learn his strength nor what he could do if he made his run. If I were him I would put in everything now and go until something broke. But, thank God, they are not as intelligent as we who kill them; although they are more noble and more able. The had seen many great fish. He had seen many that weighed more than a thousand pounds and he had caught two that size in his life, but never alone. Now alone, and out sight land, he was fast to biggest that he had ever seen and bigger than he had ever heard of, and his left hand was still as tight as gripped claws an eagle. It will uncramp though, he thought. Surely it will uncramp to help my right hand. There are three things that are brothers: and my two hands. It must uncramp. It is unworthy it to be cramped. The had slowed again and was going at his usual pace. I wonder why he jumped, thought. He jumped almost as though to show sea how big he was. I know now, anyway, he thought. I wish I could show him what sort I am. But then he would see cramped hand. Let him think I am more than I am and I will be so. I wish I was fish, he thought, with everything he has against only my will and my intelligence. He settled comfortably against wood and took his suffering as it came and swam steadily and boat moved slowly through dark water. There was a small sea rising with wind coming up from east and at noon man's left hand was uncramped. "Bad news for you, fish," he said and shifted line over sacks that covered his shoulders. He was comfortable but suffering, although he did not admit suffering at all. "I am not religious," he said. "But I will say ten Our Fathers and ten Hail Marys that I should catch this fish, and I promise to make a pilgrimage to Virgen de Cobre if I catch him. That is a promise." He commenced to say his prayers mechanically. Sometimes he would be so tired that he could not remember prayer and then he would say them fast so that they would come automatically. Hail Marys are easier to say than Our Fathers, he thought. "Hail Mary full Grace Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou among women and blessed is fruit thy womb, Jesus. Holy Mary, Mother God, pray for us sinners now and at hour our death. Amen." Then he added, "Blessed Virgin, pray for death this fish. Wonderful though he is." With his prayers said, and feeling much better, but suffering exactly as much, and perhaps a little more, he leaned against wood bow and began, mechanically, to work fingers his left hand. The sun was hot now although breeze was rising gently. "I had better re-bait that little line out over stern," he said. "If decides to stay another night I will need to eat again and is low in bottle. I don't think I can get anything but a dolphin here. But if I eat him fresh enough he won't be bad. I wish a flying would come on board tonight. But I have no light to attract them. A flying is excellent to eat paw and I would not have to cut him up. I must save all my strength now. Christ, I did not know he was so big." "I'll kill him though," he said. "In all his greatness and his glory." Although it is unjust, he thought. But I will show him what a can do and what a endures. "I told boy I was a strange man," he said. "Now is when I must prove it." The thousand times that he had proved it meant nothing. Now he was proving it again. Each time was a new time and he never thought about past when he was doing it. I wish he'd sleep and I could sleep and dream about lions, he thought. Why are lions main thing that is left? Don't think, man, he said to himself. Rest gently now against wood and think nothing. He is working. Work as little as you can. It was getting into afternoon and boat still moved slowly and steadily. But there was an added drag now from easterly breeze and rode gently with small sea and hurt cord across his back came to him easily and smoothly. Once in afternoon line started to rise again. But only continued to swim at a slightly higher level. The sun was on man's left arm and shoulder and on his back. So he knew had turned east north. Now that he had seen him once, he could picture swimming in with his purple pectoral fins set wide as wings and great erect tail slicing through dark. I wonder how much he sees at that depth, thought. His eye is huge and a horse, with much less eye, can see in dark. Once I could see quite well in dark. Not in absolute dark. But almost as a sees. The sun and his steady movement his fingers had uncramped his left hand now completely and he began to shift more strain to it and he shrugged muscles his back to shift hurt cord a little. "If you're not tired, fish," he said aloud, "you must be very strange." He felt very tired now and he knew night would come soon and he tried to think other things. He thought Big Leagues, to him they were _Gran Ligas_, and he knew that Yankees New York were playing _Tigres_ Detroit. This is second day now that I do not know result _juegos_, he thought. But I must have confidence and I must be worthy great DiMaggio who does all things perfectly even with pain bone spur in his heel. What is a bone spur? he asked himself. _Un espuela de hueso_. We do not have them. Can it be as painful as spur a fighting cock in one's heel? I do not think I could endure that or loss eye and both eyes and continue to fight as fighting cocks do. tan is not much beside great birds and beasts. Still I would rather be that beast down there in darkness sea. "Unless sharks come," he said aloud. "If sharks come, God pity him and me." Do you believe great DiMaggio would stay with a as long as I will stay with this one? he thought. I am sure he would and more since he is young and strong. Also his father was a fisherman. But would bone spur hurt him too much? "I do not know," he said aloud. "I never had a bone spur." As sun set he remembered, to give himself more confidence, time in tavern at Casablanca when he had played hand game with great negro from Cienfuegos who was strongest on docks. They had gone one day and one night with their elbows on a chalk line on table and their forearms straight up and their hands gripped tight. Each one was trying to force other's hand down onto table. There was much betting and people went in and out room under kerosene lights and he had looked at arm and hand negro and at negro's face. They changed referees every four hours after first eight so that referees could sleep. Blood came out from under fingernails both his and negro's hands and they looked each other in eye and at their hands and forearms and bettors went in and out room and sat on high chairs against wall and watched. The walls were painted bright blue and were wood and lamps threw their shadows against them. The negro's shadow was huge and it moved on wall as breeze moved lamps. The odds would change back and forth all night and they fed negro rum and lighted cigarettes for him. Then negro, after rum, would try for a tremendous effort and once he had man, who was not an then but was Santiago El Campeon, nearly three inches off balance. But had raised his hand up to dead even again. He was sure then that he had negro, who was a fine and a great athlete, beaten. And at daylight when bettors were asking that it be called a draw and referee was shaking his head, he had unleashed his effort and forced hand negro down and down until it rested on wood. The match had started on a Sunday morning and ended on a Monday morning. Many bettors had asked for a draw because they had to go to work on docks loading sacks sugar or at Havana Coal Company. Otherwise everyone would have wanted it to go to a finish. But he had finished it anyway and before anyone had to go to work. For a long time after that everyone had called him The Champion and there had been a return match in spring. But not much money was bet and he had won it quite easily since he had broken confidence negro from Cienfuegos in first match. After that he had a few matches and then no more. He decided that he could beat anyone if he wanted to badly enough and he decided that it was bad for his right hand for fishing. He had tried a few practice matches with his left hand. But his left hand had always been a traitor and would not do what he called on it to do and he did not trust it. The sun will bake it out well now, he thought. It should not cramp on sea again unless it gets too in night. I wonder what this night will bring. An airplane passed over head on its course to Miami and he watched its shadow scaring up schools flying fish. "With so much flying there should be dolphin," he said, and leaned back on line to see if it was possible to gain any on his fish. But he could not and it stayed at hardness and water-drop shivering that preceded breaking. The boat moved ahead slowly and he watched airplane until he could no longer see it. It must be very strange in an airplane, he thought. I wonder what sea looks like from that height? They should be able to see well if they do not fly too high. I would like to fly very slowly at two hundred fathoms high and see from above. In turtle boats I was in cross-trees mast-head and even at that height I saw much. The dolphin look greener from there and you can see their stripes and their purple spots and you can see all school as they swim. Why is it that all fast-moving dark current have purple backs and usually purple stripes or spots? The dolphin looks green course because he is really golden. But when he comes to feed, truly hungry, purple stripes show on his sides as on a marlin. Can it be anger, or greater speed he makes that brings them out? Just before it was dark, as they passed a great island Sargasso weed that heaved and swung in light sea as though ocean were making love with something under a yellow blanket, his small line was taken by a dolphin. He saw it first when it jumped in air, true gold in last sun and bending and flapping wildly in air. It jumped again and again in acrobatics its fear and he worked his way back to stern and crouching and holding big line with his right hand and arm, he pulled dolphin in with his left hand, stepping on gained line each time with his bare left foot. When was at stern, plunging and cutting from side to side in desperation, leaned over stern and lifted burnished gold with its purple spots over stern. Its jaws were working convulsively in quick bites against hook and it pounded bottom skiff with its long flat body, its tail and its head until he clubbed it across shining golden head until it shivered and was still. The unhooked fish, rebaited line with another sardine and tossed it over. Then he worked his way slowly back to bow. He washed his left hand and wiped it on his trousers. Then he shifted heavy line from his right hand to his left and washed his right hand in sea while he watched sun go into ocean and slant big cord. "He hasn't changed at all," he said. But watching movement against his hand he noted that it was perceptibly slower. "I'll lash two oars together across stern and that will slow him in night," he said. "He's good for night and so am I." It would be better to gut dolphin a little later to save blood in meat, he thought. I can do that a little later and lash oars to make a drag at same time. I had better keep quiet now and not disturb him too much at sunset. The setting sun is a difficult time for all fish. He let his hand dry in air then grasped line with it and eased himself as much as he could and allowed himself to be pulled forward against wood so that boat took strain as much, or more, than he did. I'm learning how to do it, he thought. This part it anyway. Then too, remember he hasn't eaten since he took bait and he is huge and needs much food. I have eaten whole bonito. Tomorrow I will eat dolphin. He called it _dorado_. Perhaps I should eat some it when I clean it. It will be harder to eat than bonito. But, then, nothing is easy. "How do you feel, fish?" he asked aloud. "I feel good and my left hand is better and I have food for a night and a day. Pull boat, fish." He did not truly feel good because pain from cord across his back had almost passed pain and gone into a dullness that he mistrusted. But I have had worse things than that, he thought. My hand is only cut a little and cramp is gone from other. My legs are all right. Also now I have gained on him in question sustenance. It was dark now as it becomes dark quickly after sun sets in September. He lay against worn wood bow and rested all that he could. The first stars were out. He did not know name Rigel but he saw it and knew soon they would all be out and he would have all his distant friends. "The is my friend too," he said aloud. "I have never seen or heard such a fish. But I must kill him. I am glad we do not have to try to kill stars." Imagine if each day a must try to kill moon, he thought. The moon runs away. But imagine if a each day should have to try to kill sun? We were born lucky, he thought. Then he was sorry for great that had nothing to eat and his determination to kill him never relaxed in his sorrow for him. How many people will he feed, he thought. But are they worthy to eat him? No, course not. There is no one worthy eating him from manner his behaviour and his great dignity. I do not understand these things, he thought. But it is good that we do not have to try to kill sun or moon or stars. It is enough to live on sea and kill our true brothers. Now, he thought, I must think about drag. It has its perils and its merits. I may lose so much line that I will lose him, if he makes his effort and drag made by oars is in place and boat loses all her lightness. Her lightness prolongs both our suffering but it is my safety since he has great speed that he has never yet employed. No matter what passes I must gut dolphin so he does not spoil and eat some him to be strong. Now I will rest an hour more and feel that he is solid and steady before I move back to stern to do work and make decision. In meantime I can see how he acts and if he shows any changes. The oars are a good trick; but it has reached time to play for safety. He is much still and I saw that hook was in corner his mouth and he has kept his mouth tight shut. The punishment hook is nothing. The punishment hunger, and that he is against something that he does not comprehend, is everything. Rest now, man, and let him work until your next duty comes. He rested for what he believed to be two hours. The moon did not rise now until late and he had no way judging time. Nor was he really resting except comparatively. He was still bearing pull across his shoulders but he placed his left hand on gunwale bow and confided more and more resistance to to skiff itself. How simple it would be if I could make line fast, he thought. But with one small lurch he could break it. I must cushion pull line with my body and at all times be ready to give line with both hands. "But you have not slept yet, man," he said aloud. "It is half a day and a night and now another day and you have not slept. You must devise a way so that you sleep a little if he is quiet and steady. If you do not sleep you might become unclear in head." I'm clear enough in head, he thought. Too clear. I am as clear as stars that are my brothers. Still I must sleep. They sleep and moon and sun sleep and even ocean sleeps sometimes on certain days when there is no current and a flat calm. But remember to sleep, he thought. Make yourself do it and devise some simple and sure way about lines. Now go back and prepare dolphin. It is too dangerous to rig oars as a drag if you must sleep. I could go without sleeping, he told himself. But it would be too dangerous. He started to work his way back to stern on his hands and knees, being careful not to jerk against fish. He may be half asleep himself, he thought. But I do not want him to rest. He must pull until he dies. Back in stern he turned so that his left hand held strain line across his shoulders and drew his knife from its sheath with his right hand. The stars were bright now and he saw dolphin clearly and he pushed blade his knife into his head and drew him out from under stern. He put one his feet on and slit him quickly from vent up to tip his lower jaw. Then he put his knife down and gutted him with his right hand, scooping him clean and pulling gills clear. He felt maw heavy and slippery in his hands and he slit it open. There were two flying inside. They were fresh and hard and he laid them side by side and dropped guts and gills over stern. They sank leaving a trail phosphorescence in water. The dolphin was and a leprous gray-white now in starlight and skinned one side him while he held his right foot on fish's head. Then he turned him over and skinned other side and cut each side off from head down to tail. He slid carcass overboard and looked to see if there was any swirl in water. But there was only light its slow descent. He turned then and placed two flying inside two fillets and putting his knife back in its sheath, he worked his way slowly back to bow. His back was bent with weight line across it and he carried in his right hand. Back in bow he laid two fillets out on wood with flying beside them. After that he settled line across his shoulders in a new place and held it again with his left hand resting on gunwale. Then he leaned over side and washed flying in water, noting speed against his hand. His hand was phosphorescent from skinning and he watched flow against it. The flow was less strong and as he rubbed side his hand against planking skiff, particles phosphorus floated off and drifted slowly astern. "He is tiring or he is resting," said. "Now let sea get through eating this dolphin and get some rest and a little sleep." Under stars and with night colder all time he ate half one dolphin fillets and one flying fish, gutted and with its head cut off. "What an excellent dolphin is to eat cooked," he said. "And what a miserable raw. I will never go in a boat again without salt or limes." If I had brains I would have splashed on bow all day and drying, it would have made salt, he thought. But then I did not hook dolphin until almost sunset. Still it was a lack preparation. But I have chewed it all well and I am not nauseated. The sky was clouding over to east and one after another stars he knew were gone. It looked now as though he were moving into a great canyon clouds and wind had dropped. "There will be bad weather in three or four days," he said. "But not tonight and not tomorrow. Rig now to get some sleep, man, while is calm and steady." He held line tight in his right hand and then pushed his thigh against his right hand as he leaned all his weight against wood bow. Then he passed line a little lower on his shoulders and braced his left hand on it. My right hand can hold it as long as it is braced, he thought. If it relaxes in sleep my left hand will wake sea as line goes out. It is hard on right hand. But he is used to punishment. Even if I sleep twenty minutes or a half an hour it is good. He lay forward cramping himself against line with all his body, putting all his weight onto his right hand, and he was asleep. He did not dream lions but instead a vast school porpoises that stretched for eight or ten miles and it was in time their mating and they would leap high into air and return into same hole they had made in when they leaped. Then he dreamed that he was in village on his bed and there was a norther and he was very and his right arm was asleep because his head had rested on it instead a pillow. After that he began to dream long yellow beach and he saw first lions come down onto it in early dark and then other lions came and he rested his chin on wood bows where ship lay anchored with evening off-shore breeze and he waited to see if there would be more lions and he was happy. The moon had been up for a long time but he slept on and pulled on steadily and boat moved into tunnel clouds. He woke with jerk his right fist coming up against his face and line burning out through his right hand. He had no feeling his left hand but he braked all he could with his right and line rushed out. Finally his left hand found line and he leaned back against line and now it burned his back and his left hand, and his left hand was taking all strain and cutting badly. He looked back at coils line and they were feeding smoothly. Just then jumped making a great bursting ocean and then a heavy fall. Then he jumped again and again and boat was going fast although line was still racing out and was raising strain to breaking point and raising it to breaking point again and again. He had been pulled down tight onto bow and his face was in cut slice dolphin and he could not move. This is what we waited for, he thought. So now let us take it. Make him pay for line, he thought. Make him pay for it. He could not see fish's jumps but only heard breaking ocean and heavy splash as he fell. The speed line was cutting his hands badly but he had always known this would happen and he tried to keep cutting across calloused parts and not let line slip into palm nor cut fingers. If boy was here he would wet coils line, he thought. Yes. If boy were here. If boy were here. The line went out and out and out but it was slowing now and he was making earn each inch it. Now he got his head up from wood and out slice that his cheek had crushed. Then he was on his knees and then he rose slowly to his feet. He was ceding line but more slowly all time. He worked back to where he could feel with his foot coils line that he could not see. There was plenty line still and now had to pull friction all that new line through water. Yes, he thought. And now he has jumped more than a dozen times and filled sacks along his back with air and he cannot go down deep to die where I cannot bring him up. He will start circling soon and then I must work on him. I wonder what started him so suddenly? Could it have been hunger that made him desperate, or was he frightened by something in night? Maybe he suddenly felt fear. But he was such a calm, strong and he seemed so fearless and so confident. It is strange. "You better be fearless and confident yourself, man," he said. "You're holding him again but you cannot get line. But soon he has to circle." The held him with his left hand and his shoulders now and stooped down and scooped up in his right hand to get crushed dolphin flesh off his face. He was afraid that it might nauseate him and he would vomit and lose his strength. When his face was cleaned he washed his right hand in over side and then let it stay in salt while he watched first light come before sunrise. He's headed almost east, he thought. That means he is tired and going with current. Soon he will have to circle. Then our true work begins. After he judged that his right hand had been in long enough he took it out and looked at it. "It is not bad," he said. "And pain does not matter to a man." He took hold line carefully so that it did not fit into any fresh line cuts and shifted his weight so that he could put his left hand into sea on other side skiff. "You did not do so badly for something worthless," he said to his left hand. "But there was a moment when I could not find you." Why was I not born with two good hands? he thought. Perhaps it was my fault in not training that one properly. But God knows he has had enough chances to learn. He did not do so badly in night, though, and he has only cramped once. If he cramps again let line cut him off. When he thought that he knew that he was not being clear-headed and he thought he should chew some more dolphin. But I can't, he told himself. It is better to be light-headed than to lose your strength from nausea. And I know I cannot keep it if I eat it since my face was in it. I will keep it for an emergency until it goes bad. But it is too late to try for strength now through nourishment. You're stupid, he told himself. Eat other flying fish. It was there, cleaned and ready, and he picked it up with his left hand and ate it chewing bones carefully and eating all it down to tail. It has more nourishment than almost any fish, he thought. At least kind strength that I need. Now I have done what I can, he thought. Let him begin to circle and let fight come. The sun was rising for third time since he had put to sea when started to circle. He could not see by slant line that was circling. It was too early for that. He just felt a faint slackening pressure line and he commenced to pull on it gently with his right hand. It tightened, as always, but just when he reached point where it would break, line began to come in. He slipped his shoulders and head from under line and began to pull in line steadily and gently. He used both his hands in a swinging motion and tried to do pulling as much as he could with his body and his legs. His legs and shoulders pivoted with swinging pulling. "It is a very big circle," he said. "But he is circling." Then line would not come in any more and he held it until he saw drops jumping from it in sun. Then it started out and knelt down and let it go grudgingly back into dark water. "He is making far part his circle now," he said. I must hold all I can, he thought. The strain will shorten his circle each time. Perhaps in an hour I will see him. Now I must convince him and then I must kill him. But kept on circling slowly and was wet with sweat and tired deep into his bones two hours later. But circles were much shorter now and from way line slanted he could tell had risen steadily while he swam. For an hour had been seeing black spots before his eyes and sweat salted his eyes and salted cut over his eye and on his forehead. He was not afraid black spots. They were normal at tension that he was pulling on line. Twice, though, he had felt faint and dizzy and that had worried him. "I could not fail myself and die on a like this," he said. "Now that I have him coming so beautifully, God help sea endure. I'll say a hundred Our Fathers and a hundred Hail Marys. But I cannot say them now." Consider them said, he thought. I'll say them later. Just then he felt a sudden banging and jerking on line he held with his two hands. It was sharp and hard-feeling and heavy. He is hitting wire leader with his spear, he thought. That was bound to come. He had to do that. It may make him jump though and I would rather he stayed circling now. The jumps were necessary for him to take air. But after that each one can widen opening hook wound and he can throw hook. "Don't jump, fish," he said. "Don't jump." The hit wire several times more and each time he shook his head gave up a little line. I must hold his pain where it is, he thought. Mine does not matter. I can control mine. But his pain could drive him mad. After a while stopped beating at wire and started circling slowly again. The was gaining line steadily now. But he felt faint again. He lifted some sea with his left hand and put it on his head. Then he put more on and rubbed back his neck. "I have no cramps," he said. "He'll be up soon and I can last. You have to last. Don't even speak it." He kneeled against bow and, for a moment, slipped line over his back again. I'll rest now while he goes out on circle and then stand up and work on him when he comes in, he decided. It was a great temptation to rest in bow and let make one circle by himself without recovering any line. But when strain showed had turned to come toward boat, rose to his feet and started pivoting and weaving pulling that brought in all line he gained. I'm tireder than I have ever been, he thought, and now trade wind is rising. But that will be good to take him in with. I need that badly. "I'll rest on next turn as he goes out," he said. "I feel much better. Then in two or three turns more I will have him." His paw hitch was far on back his head and he sank down into bow with pull line as he felt turn. You work now, fish, he thought. I'll take you at turn. The sea had risen considerably. But it was a fair-weather breeze and he had to have it to get home. "I'll just steer south and west," he said. "A is never lost at sea and it is a long island." It was on third turn that he saw first. He saw him first as a dark shadow that took so long to pass under boat that he could not believe its length. "No," he said. "He can't be that big." But he was that big and at end this circle he came to surface only thirty yards away and saw his tail out water. It was higher than a big scythe blade and a very pale lavender above dark blue water. It raked back and as swam just below surface could see his huge bulk and purple stripes that banded him. His dorsal fin was down and his huge pectorals were spread wide. On this circle could see fish's eye and two gray sucking that swam around him. Sometimes they attached themselves to him. Sometimes they darted off. Sometimes they would swim easily in his shadow. They were each over three feet long and when they swam fast they lashed their whole bodies like eels. The was sweating now but from something else besides sun. On each calm placid turn made he was gaining line and he was sure that in two turns more he would have a chance to get harpoon in. But I must get him close, close, close, he thought. I mustn't try for head. I must get heart. "Be calm and strong, man," he said. On next circle fish's back was out but he was a little too far from boat. On next circle he was still too far away but he was higher out and was sure that by gaining some more line he could have him alongside. He had rigged his harpoon long before and its coil light rope was in a round basket and end was made fast to bitt in bow. The was coming in on his circle now calm and beautiful looking and only his great tail moving. The pulled on him all that he could to bring him closer. For just a moment turned a little on his side. Then he straightened himself and began another circle. "I moved him," said. "I moved him then." He felt faint again now but he held on great all strain that he could. I moved him, he thought. Maybe this time I can get him over. Pull, hands, he thought. Hold up, legs. Last for me, head. Last for me. You never went. This time I'll pull him over. But when he put all his effort on, starting it well out before came alongside and pulling with all his strength, pulled part way over and then righted himself and swam away. "Fish," said. "Fish, you are going to have to die anyway. Do you have to kill sea too?" That way nothing is accomplished, he thought. His mouth was too dry to speak but he could not reach for now. I must get him alongside this time, he thought. I am not good for many more turns. Yes you are, he told himself. You're good for ever. On next turn, he nearly had him. But again righted himself and swam slowly away. You are killing me, fish, thought. But you have a right to. Never have I seen a greater, or more beautiful, or a calmer or more noble thing than you, brother. Come on and kill me. I do not care who kills who. Now you are getting confused in head, he thought. You must keep your head clear. Keep your head clear and know how to suffer like a man. Or a fish, he thought. "Clear up, head," he said in a voice he could hardly hear. "Clear up." Twice more it was same on turns. I do not know, thought. He had been on point feeling himself go each time. I do not know. But I will try it once more. He tried it once more and he felt himself going when he turned fish. The righted himself and swam off again slowly with great tail weaving in air. I'll try it again, promised, although his hands were mushy now and he could only see well in flashes. He tried it again and it was same. So, he thought, and he felt himself going before he started; I will try it once again. He took all his pain and what was left his strength and his long gone pride and he put it against fish's agony and came over onto his side and swam gently on his side, his bill almost touching planking skiff and started to pass boat, long, deep, wide, silver and barred with purple and interminable in water. The dropped line and put his foot on it and lifted harpoon as high as he could and drove it down with all his strength, and more strength he had just summoned, into fish's side just behind great chest fin that rose high in air to altitude man's chest. He felt iron go in and he leaned on it and drove it further and then pushed all his weight after it. Then came alive, with his death in him, and rose high out showing all his great length and width and all his power and his beauty. He seemed to hang in air above in skiff. Then he fell into with a crash that sent spray over and over all skiff. The felt faint and sick and he could not see well. But he cleared harpoon line and let it run slowly through his paw hands and, when he could see, he saw was on his back with his silver belly up. The shaft harpoon was projecting at an angle from fish's shoulder and sea was discolouring with red blood from his heart. First it was dark as a shoal in blue that was more than a mile deep. Then it spread like a cloud. The was silvery and still and floated with waves. The looked carefully in glimpse vision that he had. Then he took two turns harpoon line around bitt in bow and laid his head on his hands. "Keep my head clear," he said against wood bow. "I am a tired man. But I have killed this which is my brother and now I must do slave work." Now I must prepare nooses and rope to lash him alongside, he thought. Even if we were two and swamped her to load him and bailed her out, this skiff would never hold him. I must prepare everything, then bring him in and lash him well and step mast and set sail for home. He started to pull in to have him alongside so that he could pass a line through his gills and out his mouth and make his head fast alongside bow. I want to see him, he thought, and to touch and to feel him. He is my fortune, he thought. But that is not why I wish to feel him. I think I felt his heart, he thought. When I pushed on harpoon shaft second time. Bring him in now and make him fast and get noose around his tail and another around his middle to bind him to skiff. "Get to work, man," he said. He took a very small drink water. "There is very much slave work to be done now that fight is over." He looked up at sky and then out to his fish. He looked at sun carefully. It is not much more than noon, he thought. And trade wind is rising. The lines all mean nothing now. The boy and I will splice them when we are home. "Come on, fish," he said. But did not come. Instead he lay there wallowing now in seas and pulled skiff up onto him. When he was even with him and had fish's head against bow he could not believe his size. But he untied harpoon rope from bitt, passed it through fish's gills and out his jaws, made a turn around his sword then passed rope through other gill, made another turn around bill and knotted double rope and made it fast to bitt in bow. He cut rope then and went astern to noose tail. The had turned silver from his original purple and silver, and stripes showed same pale violet colour as his tail. They were wider than a man's hand with his fingers spread and fish's eye looked as detached as mirrors in a periscope or as a saint in a procession. "It was only way to kill him," said. He was feeling better since and he knew he would not go away and his head was clear. He's over fifteen hundred pounds way he is, he thought. Maybe much more. If he dresses out two-thirds that at thirty cents a pound? "I need a pencil for that," he said. "My head is not that clear. But I think great DiMaggio would be proud sea today. I had no bone spurs. But hands and back hurt truly." I wonder what a bone spur is, he thought. Maybe we have them without knowing it. He made fast to bow and stern and to middle thwart. He was so big it was like lashing a much bigger skiff alongside. He cut a piece line and tied fish's lower jaw against his bill so his mouth would not open and they would sail as cleanly as possible. Then he stepped mast and, with stick that was his gaff and with his boom rigged, patched sail drew, boat began to move, and half lying in stern he sailed south-west. He did not need a compass to tell him where south-west was. He only needed feel trade wind and drawing sail. I better put a small line out with a spoon on it and try and get something to eat and drink for moisture. But he could not find a spoon and his sardines were rotten. So he hooked a patch yellow gulf weed with gaff as they passed and shook it so that small shrimps that were in it fell onto planking skiff. There were more than a dozen them and they jumped and kicked like sand fleas. The pinched their heads off with his thumb and forefinger and ate them chewing up shells and tails. They were very tiny but he knew they were nourishing and they tasted good. The still had two drinks in bottle and he used half one after he had eaten shrimps. The skiff was sailing well considering handicaps and he steered with tiller under his arm. He could see and he had only to look at his hands and feel his back against stern to know that this had truly happened and was not a dream. At one time when he was feeling so badly toward end, he had thought perhaps it was a dream. Then when he had seen come out and hang motionless in sky before he fell, he was sure there was some great strangeness and he could not believe it. Then he could not see well, although now he saw as well as ever. Now he knew there was and his hands and back were no dream. The hands cure quickly, he thought. I bled them clean and salt will heal them. The dark true gulf is greatest healer that there is. All I must do is keep head clear. The hands have done their work and we sail well. With his mouth shut and his tail straight up and down we sail like brothers. Then his head started to become a little unclear and he thought, is he bringing sea in or am I bringing him in? If I were towing him behind there would be no question. Nor if were in skiff, with all dignity gone, there would be no question either. But they were sailing together lashed side by side and thought, let him bring sea in if it pleases him. I am only better than him through trickery and he meant sea no harm. They sailed well and soaked his hands in salt and tried to keep his head clear. There were high cumulus clouds and enough cirrus above them so that knew breeze would last all night. The looked at constantly to make sure it was true. It was an hour before first shark hit him. The shark was not an accident. He had come up from deep down in as dark cloud blood had settled and dispersed in mile deep sea. He had come up so fast and absolutely without caution that he broke surface blue and was in sun. Then he fell back into sea and picked up scent and started swimming on course skiff and had taken. Sometimes he lost scent. But he would pick it up again, or have just a trace it, and he swam fast and hard on course. He was a very big Mako shark built to swim as fast as fastest in sea and everything about him was beautiful except his jaws. His back was as blue as a sword fish's and his belly was silver and his hide was smooth and handsome. He was built as a sword except for his huge jaws which were tight shut now as he swam fast, just under surface with his high dorsal fin knifing through without wavering. Inside closed double lip his jaws all his eight rows teeth were slanted inwards. They were not ordinary pyramid-shaped teeth most sharks. They were shaped like a man's fingers when they are crisped like claws. They were nearly as long as fingers and they had razor-sharp cutting edges on both sides. This was a built to feed on all fishes in sea, that were so fast and strong and well armed that they had no other enemy. Now he speeded up as he smelled fresher scent and his blue dorsal fin cut water. When saw him coming he knew that this was a shark that had no fear at all and would do exactly what he wished. He prepared harpoon and made rope fast while he watched shark come on. The rope was short as it lacked what he had cut away to lash fish. The man's head was clear and good now and he was full resolution but he had little hope. It was too good to last, he thought. He took one look at great as he watched shark close in. It might as well have been a dream, he thought. I cannot keep him from hitting sea but maybe I can get him. _Dentuso_, he thought. Bad luck to your mother. The shark closed fast astern and when he hit saw his mouth open and his strange eyes and clicking chop teeth as he drove forward in meat just above tail. The shark's head was out and his back was coming out and could hear noise skin and flesh ripping on big when he rammed harpoon down onto shark's head at a spot where line between his eyes intersected with line that ran straight back from his nose. There were no such lines. There was only heavy sharp blue head and big eyes and clicking, thrusting all-swallowing jaws. But that was location brain and hit it. He hit it with his blood mushed hands driving a good harpoon with all his strength. He hit it without hope but with resolution and complete malignancy. The shark swung over and saw his eye was not alive and then he swung over once again, wrapping himself in two loops rope. The knew that he was dead but shark would not accept it. Then, on his back, with his tail lashing and his jaws clicking, shark plowed over as a speed-boat does. The was white where his tail beat it and three-quarters his body was clear above when rope came taut, shivered, and then snapped. The shark lay quietly for a little while on surface and watched him. Then he went down very slowly. "He took about forty pounds," said aloud. He took my harpoon too and all rope, he thought, and now my bleeds again and there will be others. He did not like to look at anymore since he had been mutilated. When had been hit it was as though he himself were hit. But I killed shark that hit my fish, he thought. And he was biggest _dentuso_ that I have ever seen. And God knows that I have seen big ones. It was too good to last, he thought. I wish it had been a dream now and that I had never hooked and was alone in bed on newspapers. "But is not made for defeat," he said. "A can be destroyed but not defeated." I am sorry that I killed though, he thought. Now bad time is coming and I do not even have harpoon. The _dentuso_ is cruel and able and strong and intelligent. But I was more intelligent that he was. Perhaps not, he thought. Perhaps I was only better armed. "Don't think, man," he said aloud. "Sail on this course and take it when it comes." But I must think, he thought. Because it is all I have left. That and baseball. I wonder how great DiMaggio would have liked way I hit him in brain? It was no great thing, he thought. Any could do it. But do you think my hands were as great a handicap as bone spurs? I cannot know. I never had anything wrong with my heel except time sting ray stung it when I stepped on him when swimming and paralyzed lower leg and made unbearable pain. "Think about something cheerful, man," he said. "Every minute now you are closer to home. You sail lighter for loss forty pounds." He knew quite well pattern what could happen when he reached inner part current. But there was nothing to be done now. "Yes there is," he said aloud. "I can lash my knife to butt one oars." So he did that with tiller under his arm and sheet sail under his foot. "Now," he said. "I am still an man. But I am not unarmed." The breeze was fresh now and he sailed on well. He watched only forward part and some his hope returned. It is silly not to hope, he thought. Besides I believe it is a sin. Do not think about sin, he thought. There are enough problems now without sin. Also I have no understanding it. I have no understanding it and I am not sure that I believe in it. Perhaps it was a sin to kill fish. I suppose it was even though I did it to keep sea alive and feed many people. But then everything is a sin. Do not think about sin. It is much too late for that and there are people who are paid to do it. Let them think about it. You were born to be a fisherman as was born to be a fish. San Pedro was a fisherman as was father great DiMaggio. But he liked to think about all things that he was involved in and since there was nothing to read and he did not have a radio, he thought much and he kept on thinking about sin. You did not kill only to keep alive and to sell for food, he thought. You killed him for pride and because you are a fisherman. You loved him when he was alive and you loved him after. It you love him, it is not a sin to kill him. Or is it more? "You think too much, man," he said aloud. But you enjoyed killing _dentuso_, he thought. He lives on live as you do. He is not a scavenger nor just a moving appetite as some sharks are. He is beautiful and noble and knows no fear anything. "I killed him in self-defense," said aloud. "And I killed him well." Besides, he thought, everything kills everything else in some way. Fishing kills sea exactly as it keeps sea alive. The boy keeps sea alive, he thought. I must not deceive myself too much. He leaned over side and pulled loose a piece meat where shark had cut him. He chewed it and noted its quality and its good taste. It was firm and juicy, like meat, but it was not red. There was no stringiness in it and he knew that it would bring highest price in market. But there was no way to keep its scent out and knew that a very bad time was coming. The breeze was steady. It had backed a little further into north-east and he knew that meant that it would not fall off. The looked ahead him but he could see no sails nor could he see hull nor smoke any ship. There were only flying that went up from his bow sailing away to either side and yellow patches gulf-weed. He could not even see a bird. He had sailed for two hours, resting in stern and sometimes chewing a bit meat from marlin, trying to rest and to be strong, when he saw first two sharks. "_Ay_," he said aloud. There is no translation for this word and perhaps it is just a noise such as a might make, involuntarily, feeling nail go through his hands and into wood. "_Galanos_," he said aloud. He had seen second fin now coming up behind first and had identified them as shovel-nosed sharks by brown, triangular fin and sweeping movements tail. They had scent and were excited and in stupidity their great hunger they were losing and finding scent in their excitement. But they were closing all time. The made sheet fast and jammed tiller. Then he took up oar with knife lashed to it. He lifted it as lightly as he could because his hands rebelled at pain. Then he opened and closed them on it lightly to loosen them. He closed them firmly so they would take pain now and would not flinch and watched sharks come. He could see their wide, flattened, shovel-pointed heads now and their white-tipped wide pectoral fins. They were hateful sharks, bad smelling, scavengers as well as killers, and when they were hungry they would bite at an oar or rudder a boat. It was these sharks that would cut turtles' legs and flippers off when turtles were asleep on surface, and they would hit a in water, if they were hungry, even if had no smell blood nor slime on him. "_Ay_," said. "_Galanos_. Come on, _Galanos_." They came. But they did not come as Mako had come. One turned and went out sight under skiff and could feel skiff shake as he jerked and pulled on fish. The other watched with his slitted yellow eyes and then came in fast with his half circle jaws wide to hit where he had already been bitten. The line showed clearly on top his brown head and back where brain joined spinal cord and drove knife on oar into juncture, withdrew it, and drove it in again into shark's yellow cat-like eyes. The shark let go and slid down, swallowing what he had taken as he died. The skiff was still shaking with destruction other shark was doing to and let go sheet so that skiff would swing broadside and bring shark out from under. When he saw shark he leaned over side and punched at him. He hit only meat and hide was set hard and he barely got knife in. The blow hurt not only his hands but his shoulder too. But shark came up fast with his head out and hit him squarely in center his flat-topped head as his nose came out and lay against fish. The withdrew blade and punched shark exactly in same spot again. He still hung to with his jaws hooked and stabbed him in his left eye. The shark still hung there. "No?" said and he drove blade between vertebrae and brain. It was an easy shot now and he felt cartilage sever. The reversed oar and put blade between shark's jaws to open them. He twisted blade and as shark slid loose he said, "Go on, _galano_. Slide down a mile deep. Go see your friend, or maybe it's your mother." The wiped blade his knife and laid down oar. Then he found sheet and sail filled and he brought skiff onto her course. "They must have taken a quarter him and best meat," he said aloud. "I wish it were a dream and that I had never hooked him. I'm sorry about it, fish. It makes everything wrong." He stopped and he did not want to look at now. Drained blood and awash he looked colour silver backing a mirror and his stripes still showed. "I shouldn't have gone out so far, fish," he said. "Neither for you nor for me. I'm sorry, fish." Now, he said to himself. Look to lashing on knife and see if it has been cut. Then get your hand in order because there still is more to come. "I wish I had a stone for knife," said after he had checked lashing on oar butt. "I should have brought a stone." You should have brought many things, he thought. But you did not bring them, man. Now is no time to think what you do not have. Think what you can do with what there is. "You give sea much good counsel," he said aloud. "I'm tired it." He held tiller under his arm and soaked both his hands in as skiff drove forward. "God knows how much that last one took," he said. "But she's much lighter now." He did not want to think mutilated under-side fish. He knew that each jerking bumps shark had been meat torn away and that now made a trail for all sharks as wide as a highway through sea. He was a to keep a all winter, he thought. Don't think that. Just rest and try to get your hands in shape to defend what is left him. The blood smell from my hands means nothing now with all that scent in water. Besides they do not bleed much. There is nothing cut that means anything. The bleeding may keep left from cramping. What can I think now? he thought. Nothing. I must think nothing and wait for next ones. I wish it had really been a dream, he thought. But who knows? It might have turned out well. The next shark that came was a single shovel-nose. He came like a pig to trough if a pig had a mouth so wide that you could put your head in it. The let him hit and then drove knife on oar down into his brain. But shark jerked backwards as he rolled and knife blade snapped. The settled himself to steer. He did not even watch big shark sinking slowly in water, showing first life-size, then small, then tiny. That always fascinated man. But he did not even watch it now. "I have gaff now," he said. "But it will do no good. I have two oars and tiller and short club." Now they have beaten me, he thought. I am too to club sharks to death. But I will try it as long as I have oars and short club and tiller. He put his hands in again to soak them. It was getting late in afternoon and he saw nothing but sea and sky. There was more wind in sky than there had been, and soon he hoped that he would see land. "You're tired, man," he said. "You're tired inside." The sharks did not hit him again until just before sunset. The saw brown fins coming along wide trail must make in water. They were not even quartering on scent. They were headed straight for skiff swimming side by side. He jammed tiller, made sheet fast and reached under stern for club. It was an oar handle from a broken oar sawed off to about two and a half feet in length. He could only use it effectively with one hand because grip handle and he took good hold it with his right hand, flexing his hand on it, as he watched sharks come. They were both _galanos_. I must let first one get a good hold and hit him on point nose or straight across top head, he thought. The two sharks closed together and as he saw one nearest him open his jaws and sink them into silver side fish, he raised club high and brought it down heavy and slamming onto top shark's broad head. He felt rubbery solidity as club came down. But he felt rigidity bone too and he struck shark once more hard across point nose as he slid down from fish. The other shark had been in and out and now came in again with his jaws wide. The could see pieces meat spilling white from corner his jaws as he bumped and closed his jaws. He swung at him and hit only head and shark looked at him and wrenched meat loose. The swung club down on him again as he slipped away to swallow and hit only heavy solid rubberiness. "Come on, _galano_," said. "Come in again." The shark came in a rush and hit him as he shut his jaws. He hit him solidly and from as high up as he could raise club. This time he felt bone at base brain and he hit him again in same place while shark tore meat loose sluggishly and slid down from fish. The watched for him to come again but neither shark showed. Then he saw one on surface swimming in circles. He did not see fin other. I could not expect to kill them, he thought. I could have in my time. But I have hurt them both badly and neither one can feel very good. If I could have used a with two hands I could have killed first one surely. Even now, he thought. He did not want to look at fish. He knew that half him had been destroyed. The sun had gone down while he had been in fight with sharks. "It will be dark soon," he said. "Then I should see glow Havana. If I am too far to eastward I will see lights one new beaches." I cannot be too far out now, he thought. I hope no one has been too worried. There is only boy to worry, course. But I am sure he would have confidence. Many older fishermen will worry. Many others too, he thought. I live in a good town. He could not talk to anymore because had been ruined too badly. Then something came into his head. "Half fish," he said. "Fish that you were. I am sorry that I went too far out. I ruined us both. But we have killed many sharks, you and I, and ruined many others. How many did you ever kill, fish? You do not have that spear on your head for nothing." He liked to think and what he could do to a shark if he were swimming free. I should have chopped bill off to fight them with, he thought. But there was no hatchet and then there was no knife. But if I had, and could have lashed it to an oar butt, what a weapon. Then we might have fought them together. What will you do now if they come in night? What can you do? "Fight them," he said. "I'll fight them until I die." But in dark now and no glow showing and no lights and only wind and steady pull sail he felt that perhaps he was already dead. He put his two hands together and felt palms. They were not dead and he could bring pain life by simply opening and closing them. He leaned his back against stern and knew he was not dead. His shoulders told him. I have all those prayers I promised if I caught fish, he thought. But I am too tired to say them now. I better get sack and put it over my shoulders. He lay in stern and steered and watched for glow to come in sky. I have half him, he thought. Maybe I'll have luck to bring forward half in. I should have some luck. No, he said. You violated your luck when you went too far outside. "Don't be silly," he said aloud. "And keep awake and steer. You may have much luck yet." "I'd like to buy some if there's any place they sell it," he said. What could I buy it with? he asked himself. Could I buy it with a lost harpoon and a broken knife and two bad hands? "You might," he said. "You tried to buy it with eighty-four days at sea. They nearly sold it to you too." I must not think nonsense, he thought. Luck is a thing that comes in many forms and who can recognize her? I would take some though in any form and pay what they asked. I wish I could see glow from lights, he thought. I wish too many things. But that is thing I wish for now. He tried to settle more comfortably to steer and from his pain he knew he was not dead. He saw reflected glare lights city at what must have been around ten o'clock at night. They were only perceptible at first as light is in sky before moon rises. Then they were steady to see across ocean which was rough now with increasing breeze. He steered inside glow and he thought that now, soon, he must hit edge stream. Now it is over, he thought. They will probably hit sea again. But what can a do against them in dark without a weapon? He was stiff and sore now and his wounds and all strained parts his body hurt with night. I hope I do not have to fight again, he thought. I hope so much I do not have to fight again. But by midnight he fought and this time he knew fight was useless. They came in a pack and he could only see lines in that their fins made and their phosphorescence as they threw themselves on fish. He clubbed at heads and heard jaws chop and shaking skiff as they took hold below. He clubbed desperately at what he could only feel and hear and he felt something seize club and it was gone. He jerked tiller free from rudder and beat and chopped with it, holding it in both hands and driving it down again and again. But they were up to bow now and driving in one after other and together, tearing off pieces meat that showed glowing below sea as they turned to come once more. One came, finally, against head itself and he knew that it was over. He swung tiller across shark's head where jaws were caught in heaviness fish's head which would not tear. He swung it once and twice and again. He heard tiller break and he lunged at shark with splintered butt. He felt it go in and knowing it was sharp he drove it in again. The shark let go and rolled away. That was last shark pack that came. There was nothing more for them to eat. The could hardly breathe now and he felt a strange taste in his mouth. It was coppery and sweet and he was afraid it for a moment. But there was not much it. He spat into ocean and said, "Eat that, _Galanos_. And make a dream you've killed a man." He knew he was beaten now finally and without remedy and he went back to stern and found jagged end tiller would fit in slot rudder well enough for him to steer. He settled sack around his shoulders and put skiff on her course. He sailed lightly now and he had no thoughts nor any feelings any kind. He was past everything now and he sailed skiff to make his home port as well and as intelligently as he could. In night sharks hit carcass as someone might pick up crumbs from table. The paid no attention to them and did not pay any attention to anything except steering. He only noticed how lightly and how well skiff sailed now there was no great weight beside her. She's good, he thought. She is sound and not harmed in any way except for tiller. That is easily replaced. He could feel he was inside current now and he could see lights beach colonies along shore. He knew where he was now and it was nothing to get home. The wind is our friend, anyway, he thought. Then he added, sometimes. And great sea with our friends and our enemies. And bed, he thought. Bed is my friend. Just bed, he thought. Bed will be a great thing. It is easy when you are beaten, he thought. I never knew how easy it was. And what beat you, he thought. "Nothing," he said aloud. "I went out too far." When he sailed into little harbour lights Terrace were out and he knew everyone was in bed. The breeze had risen steadily and was blowing strongly now. It was quiet in harbour though and he sailed up onto little patch shingle below rocks. There was no one to help him so he pulled boat up as far as he could. Then he stepped out and made her fast to a rock. He unstepped mast and furled sail and tied it. Then he shouldered mast and started to climb. It was then he knew depth his tiredness. He stopped for a moment and looked back and saw in reflection from street light great tail standing up well behind skiff's stern. He saw white naked line his backbone and dark mass head with projecting bill and all nakedness between. He started to climb again and at top he fell and lay for some time with mast across his shoulder. He tried to get up. But it was too difficult and he sat there with mast on his shoulder and looked at road. A passed on far side going about its business and watched it. Then he just watched road. Finally he put mast down and stood up. He picked mast up and put it on his shoulder and started up road. He had to sit down five times before he reached his shack. Inside shack he leaned mast against wall. In dark he found a bottle and took a drink. Then he lay down on bed. He pulled blanket over his shoulders and then over his back and legs and he slept face down on newspapers with his arms out straight and palms his hands up. He was asleep when boy looked in door in morning. It was blowing so hard that drifting-boats would not be going out and boy had slept late and then come to man's shack as he had come each morning. The boy saw that was breathing and then he saw man's hands and he started to cry. He went out very quietly to go to bring some coffee and all way down road he was crying. Many fishermen were around skiff looking at what was lashed beside it and one was in water, his trousers rolled up, measuring skeleton with a length line. The boy did not go down. He had been there before and one fishermen was looking after skiff for him. "How is he?" one fishermen shouted. "Sleeping," boy called. He did not care that they saw him crying. "Let no one disturb him." "He was eighteen feet from nose to tail," fisherman who was measuring him called. "I believe it," boy said. He went into Terrace and asked for a can coffee. "Hot and with plenty milk and sugar in it." "Anything more?" "No. Afterwards I will see what he can eat." "What a it was," proprietor said. "There has never been such a fish. Those were two fine you took yesterday too." "Damn my fish," boy said and he started to cry again. "Do you want a drink any kind?" proprietor asked. "No," boy said. "Tell them not to bother Santiago. I'll be back." "Tell him how sorry I am." "Thanks," boy said. The boy carried hot can coffee up to man's shack and sat by him until he woke. Once it looked as though he were waking. But he had gone back into heavy sleep and boy had gone across road to borrow some wood to heat coffee. Finally woke. "Don't sit up," boy said. "Drink this." He poured some coffee in a glass. The took it and drank it. "They beat me, Manolin," he said. "They truly beat me." "He didn't beat you. Not fish." "No. Truly. It was afterwards." "Pedrico is looking after skiff and gear. What do you want done with head?" "Let Pedrico chop it up to use in traps." "And spear?" "You keep it if you want it." "I want it," boy said. "Now we must make our plans about other things." "Did they search for me?" "Of course. With coast guard and with planes." "The ocean is very big and a skiff is small and hard to see," said. He noticed how pleasant it was to have someone to talk to instead speaking only to himself and to sea. "I missed you," he said. "What did you catch?" "One first day. One second and two third." "Very good." "Now we together again." "No. I am not lucky. I am not lucky anymore." "The hell with luck," boy said. "I'll bring luck with me." "What will your family say?" "I do not care. I caught two yesterday. But we will together now for I still have much to learn." "We must get a good killing lance and always have it on board. You can make blade from a spring leaf from an Ford. We can grind it in Guanabacoa. It should be sharp and not tempered so it will break. My knife broke." "I'll get another knife and have spring ground. How many days heavy _brisa_ have we?" "Maybe three. Maybe more." "I will have everything in order," boy said. "You get your hands well man." "I know how to care for them. In night I spat something strange and felt something in my chest was broken." "Get that well too," boy said. "Lie down, man, and I will bring you your clean shirt. And something to eat." "Bring any papers time that I was gone," said. "You must get well fast for there is much that I can learn and you can teach sea everything. How much did you suffer?" "Plenty," said. "I'll bring food and papers," boy said. "Rest well, man. I will bring stuff from drug-store for your hands." "Don't forget to tell Pedrico head is his." "No. I will remember." As boy went out door and down worn coral rock road he was crying again. That afternoon there was a party tourists at Terrace and looking down in among empty beer cans and dead barracudas a woman saw a great long white spine with a huge tail at end that lifted and swung with tide while east wind blew a heavy steady sea outside entrance to harbour. "What's that?" she asked a waiter and pointed to long backbone great that was now just garbage waiting to go out with tide. "Tiburon," waiter said, "Eshark." He was meaning to explain what had happened. "I didn't know sharks had such handsome, beautifully formed tails." "I didn't either," her male companion said. Up road, in his shack, was sleeping again. He was still sleeping on his face and boy was sitting by him watching him. The was dreaming about lions. _BOOKS BY_ ERNEST HEMINGWAY THE tan AND THE sea ACROSS THE RIVER AND INTO THE TREES FOR WHOM THE BELL TOLLS THE FIFTH COLUMN AND THE FIRST FORTY-NINE STORIES TO HAVE AND HAVE NOT GREEN HILLS OF AFRICA WINNER TAKE NOTHING DEATH IN THE AFTERNOON A FAREWELL TO ARMS MEN WITHOUT WOMEN THE SUN ALSO RISES THE TORRENTS OF SPRING IN OUR TIME _CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS_ [End The tan and Sea, by Ernest Hemingway]